## How is the Age of Dinosaur Species Estimated?

- posted by: [Simon Stelling](https://stackexchange.com/users/-1/143-simon-stelling) on 2011-04-20
- tagged: `dinosaur`, `estimation`, `age`
- score: 2

From wikipedia's article on [T-Rex][1]:

> Fossils are found in a variety of rock formations dating to the Maastrichtian age 
> of the upper Cretaceous Period, 67 to 65.5 million years ago.

How can scientists measure the timeframe within which a given dinosaur species was alive from their bones? What factors influence the accuracy of the measurement and how can it be verified?

  [1]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/T-Rex


## Answer 228

- posted by: [tryaria](https://stackexchange.com/users/-1/142-tryaria) on 2011-04-20
- score: 3

So, there are several parts to this answer. Bear with me if it takes a bit to get to the part of the answer that you're looking for.

The first technique is to use something called relative dating. This is a basic geologic tool that allows geologists to sort things by, essentially, how far down the geologic strata they are. Simply put, if you can look into the rock record and tell which end is up, you can say that the stuff put down more recently contains fossils that are younger than the stuff put down a long time ago. This is how geologists date fossils in the field, without the assistance of laboratory analysis, and is why we continue to use terms like the "Cretaceous" for identification, rather than just specifying the age of the fossil.

The second technique is called radiometric dating. This uses the radioactive decay of an element over time to determine the age of the object in question. This involves measuring the abundance of the parent (the isotope of the element that is decaying) and the daughter (the isotope of the element that it decays into) isotopes relative to some known standard, typically a non-radiogenic isotope (an isotope that is neither radioactive, nor a product of the decay of a different isotope) of the parent element, and then modeling the age of the object based on some known parameters - for example the initial abundance of the parent element in the object.

For things as young as many fossils, 14C decay is most frequently used because it has a half-life of about 5730 years (after about 5 half-lives the element is too scarce to accurately date the sample). 14C is a bit peculiar since the parent is continuously generated by the interaction of the Earth's atmosphere with solar radiation. This gives us some constraints on the abundance of 14C in an organism when it dies. For older fossils, other systems are used.

The accuracy of several key variables changes the maximum precision on an age date. These variables include the half life (the time it takes for half of a parent isotope to decay away - often reported as a "decay constant" which has a mathematical relationship to the half-life), the initial abundance of the parent isotope, the initial abundance of the daughter isotope, and the degree of alteration the sample has experienced.



---

All content is licensed under the [CC BY-SA 3.0 license](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/).
